[telemetry_chargeback] Get chargeback data results from loki and validate (TEMP) (#335)
infrawatch/feature-verification-tests: roles/telemetry_chargeback/README.md

| `local_cert_dir` | `{{ ansible_env.HOME }}/ci-framework-data/flush_certs` | Local directory for flush certs (removed by cleanup_ck.yml after the run). |
| `remote_cert_dir` | `osp-certs` | Directory inside the OpenStack pod for certs. |
| `cert_secret_name` | `cert-cloudkitty-client-internal` | OpenShift secret name for client certificates. |
| `client_secret` | `secret/cloudkitty-lokistack-gateway-client-http` | Secret for flush client certs. |
| `ca_configmap` | `cm/cloudkitty-lokistack-ca-bundle` | ConfigMap for CA bundle. |
| `logql_query` | `{service="cloudkitty"}` (overridable via `loki_query`) | LogQL query for Loki. |
| `cloudkitty_namespace` | `openstack` | OpenShift namespace for Cloudkitty/Loki resources. |
| `openstackpod` | `openstackclient` | OpenStack client pod name for exec/cp. |
| `lookback` | `6` | Days lookback for Loki query time range. |
| `limit` | `50` | Limit for Loki query results. |

**Example: Overriding variables when importing the role**
```yaml
- name: "Run chargeback tests"
  ansible.builtin.import_role:
    name: telemetry_chargeback
  vars:
    cloudkitty_namespace: "my-custom-namespace"
    lookback: 10
    cloudkitty_debug: true
```

> ### Internal Variables (vars/main.yml)

Reviewer: I don't think that internal vars should be documented like this. I think they typically are not, since they are not intended to be configurable during typical usage of the role.

If they are documented, it should be in the vars/main.yml file itself

Reviewer: I've proposed a PR here: https://github.com/infrawatch/feature-verification-tests/pull/352
Please comment on that

Reviewer: https://github.com/infrawatch/feature-verification-tests/pull/355 <- I've proposed a change to this branch that will remove this section from the README

| `cloudkitty_synth_totals_metrics_suffix` | `-synth_metrics_summary.yml` | Suffix for generated metric totals files (from synthetic data). |
| `cloudkitty_loki_totals_metrics_suffix` | `-loki_metrics_summary.yml` | Suffix for metric totals computed from Loki-retrieved JSON (retrieve_loki_data task). |
| `cloudkitty_loki_totals_suffix` | `-rating.yml` | Suffix for CloudKitty rating summary output files (from loki_rate task). |

**Note:** Loki push/query URLs are set dynamically in `setup_loki_env.yml` from the Cloudkitty Loki route.

### Synthetic Data Scripts

**gen_synth_loki_data.py** — Generates Loki-format JSON from a scenario YAML and template. The role invokes it with `-r` so that timestamps in the output are in **reverse** order (youngest first, oldest last). When run manually you can omit `-r` for chronological order (oldest first, youngest last).

| Option | Description |
|--------|--------------|
| `--tmpl` | Path to the Jinja2 template (e.g. `loki_data_templ.j2`). |
| `-t`, `--test` | Path to the scenario YAML (e.g. `test_dyn_basic.yml`). |
| `-o`, `--output` | Path to the output JSON file. |

> | `-p`, `--project-id` | Optional; overrides `groupby.project_id` in every log entry. |
> | `-u`, `--user-id` | Optional; overrides `groupby.user_id` in every log entry. |

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't block on this, but there are other changes, that I think should go in. So we may get this in as well. This now differs from what's being done in the script and what's in the help for the params.
```suggestion
| `-p`, `--project-id` | Optional; overrides `groupby.project` in every log entry. |
| `-u`, `--user-id` | Optional; overrides `groupby.user` in every log entry. |
```

Author: Issue created for this change:

https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/OSPRH-29232

* **data_log** — `total_timesteps`, `metrics_per_step`, `log_count`.
* **rate** — `by_types` (per-type `Rate` calculated as `Σ((qty_mutated * factor + offset) * price)`) and `total.Rating` (sum of all rates).

### Dynamically Set Variables

Set in **main.yml** from the OpenStack CLI (`openstack project show admin` / `openstack user show admin`):

| Variable | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `cloudkitty_project_id` | ID of the OpenStack project named `admin` (empty string if not found). Passed as `-p` to the synthetic data generator when non-empty. |
| `cloudkitty_user_id` | ID of the OpenStack user named `admin` (empty string if not found). Passed as `-u` to the synthetic data generator when non-empty. |

Set in **gen_synth_loki_data.yml** for each scenario file during the loop:

| Variable | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `cloudkitty_data_file` | Local path for generated JSON data (`{{ artifacts_dir_zuul }}/{{ scenario_name }}-synth_data.json`) |
| `cloudkitty_synth_totals_file` | Local path for calculated metric totals (`{{ artifacts_dir_zuul }}/{{ scenario_name }}{{ cloudkitty_synth_totals_suffix }}`) |

> | `cloudkitty_test_file` | Path to the scenario configuration file (`{{ cloudkitty_scenario_dir }}/{{ scenario_name }}.yml`) |

Reviewer: IMHO, these are not needed. The purpose of the README is not to describe the internals of the role.

If you want to include this, it should be in some developer docs file. This could be under a docs repo for the role, or in another .md file for dev-docs or hacking

> Scenario Configuration

Reviewer: The description of the scenario generation should be in docs/ IMHO, not in README, which is a high level overview of the role.

----------------------
The synthetic data generation is controlled by YAML configuration files in the `files/` directory. Any file matching `test_*.yml` will be automatically discovered and processed. Files whose names start with an underscore (e.g. `_test_*.yml`) are **not** discovered by the role; they can be used as reference or for manual runs.

Each scenario file defines:

* **generation** — Time range configuration (days, step_seconds).

> * **log_types** — List of log type definitions. Each entry has **type** (identifier and value in output), unit, description, qty, price, groupby, and metadata. The **groupby** dict typically includes dimension keys (e.g. id, user_id, project_id, tenant_id); the generator merges **date_fields** into groupby at run time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **log_types** — List of log type definitions. Each entry has **type** (identifier and value in output), unit, description, qty, price, groupby, and metadata. The **groupby** dict typically includes dimension keys (e.g. user, project, resource); the generator merges **date_fields** into groupby at run time.
```
Let's get this to match what we actually have in prometheus and loki and what's in test_dyn_basic.yml. We dropped the _id suffix. I'm not sure if the actual data would have "id" or "tenant". I think "tenant" was replaced in most places across openstack with "project" and it's quite synonymous. But we definitely have "resource" for a lot of the data.

Author: https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/OSPRH-29232

| `artifacts_dir_zuul` | `{{ ansible_env.HOME }}/ci-framework-data/artifacts` | Directory for generated artifacts. |
| `cloudkitty_scenario_dir` | `{{ role_path }}/files` | Directory containing scenario files (`test_*.yml`). |
| `cloudkitty_synth_data_suffix` | `-synth_data.json` | Suffix for generated synthetic data files. |
| `cloudkitty_loki_data_suffix` | `-loki_data.json` | Suffix for Loki query result JSON files. |
| `cloudkitty_synth_totals_suffix` | `-synth_metrics_totals.yml` | Suffix for generated metric totals files (from synthetic data). |
| `cloudkitty_loki_totals_suffix` | `-loki_totals.yml` | Suffix for CloudKitty rating summary output files (from loki_rate task). |
| `cloudkitty_loki_totals_metrics_suffix` | `-loki_metrics_totals.yml` | Suffix for metric totals computed from Loki-retrieved JSON (retrieve_loki_data task). |
| `cloudkitty_synth_script` | `{{ role_path }}/files/gen_synth_loki_data.py` | Path to the synthetic data generation script. |
| `cloudkitty_data_template` | `{{ role_path }}/templates/loki_data_templ.j2` | Path to the Jinja2 template for Loki data format. |

> | `cloudkitty_summary_script` | `{{ role_path }}/files/gen_db_summary.py` | Path to the summary script (gen_db_summary.py). |

Reviewer: These are all defined in the vars/main.yml file. They cannot be configured when importing the role.

If you set vars on the play (like we do with logging, those will not be honored while running, since the role vars have a higher precedence.
Users would expect to be able to do this and not just use the `vars` option on role import.

https://docs.ansible.com/projects/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_variables.html#understanding-variable-precedence

Anything that needs to be configurable when calling the role should be in defaults/

Author: Thanks for the feedback.  Fixing variable precedence issues in next commit.

Scenario Configuration
----------------------
The synthetic data generation is controlled by YAML configuration files in the `files/` directory. Any file matching `test_*.yml` will be automatically discovered and processed. Files whose names start with an underscore (e.g. `_test_*.yml`) are **not** discovered by the role; they can be used as reference or for manual runs.

Each scenario file defines:

* **generation** — Time range configuration (days, step_seconds).
* **log_types** — List of log type definitions. Each entry has **type** (identifier and value in output), unit, description, qty, price, groupby, and metadata. The **groupby** dict typically includes dimension keys (e.g. id, user_id, project_id, tenant_id); the generator merges **date_fields** into groupby at run time.
* **required_fields** — Top-level keys required for each log type (e.g. type, unit, qty, price, groupby, metadata).
* **date_fields** — Date field names to merge into groupby (week_of_the_year, day_of_the_year, month, year).
* **loki_stream** — Loki stream configuration (service name).

> **groupby.id** should be consistent by metric type across all scenario files so that the same type always uses the same id. The reference mapping is defined in `_test_all_qty_zero.yml` (e.g. `ceilometer_cpu_num` → me1, `ceilometer_image_size` → me2, `ceilometer_ip_floating` → me7).

Reviewer 2: I don't see the _test_all_qty_zero.yml existing.

Author: Removing reference to all but one test.

Example scenario files:

* `test_static_basic.yml` — Basic static values for qty and price.
* `test_static_basic_gid.yml` — Same as above with explicit groupby ids.
* `test_dyn_basic.yml` — Dynamic values distributed across time steps.

> * `_test_all_qty_zero.yml` — Reference scenario (all quantities zero); defines the standard groupby.id mapping. Not auto-discovered.

Reviewer 2: Do all of these exist? I see only test_dyn_basic.yml

Author: They exist but there is a bug in the job that only one job to run correctly, so references need to be remove for other tests till the bug is fixed.
